i 'm as a font, or more precisely, a high-functioning autistic savant. it 's a rare condition. and rarer still when accompanied, as in my case, by self-awareness and a mastery of language. very often when i meet someone and they've learned is about me, there 's a certain kind of awkwardness. i can see it in their lives. they want to ask me something. and in the end, quite often, the urge stronger than they are and they blurted out, if i give you my date of birth, can it 's an order of the week i was born on. well they mention cube roots all asked me to recite a long number or long text. i hope you 'll forgive me, if i do n't perform a kind of one-man savant show for you today. i i 'm going to talk instead about something far more interesting than these of first full cube roots, a little deeper and a lot closer, to my mind, and work. i want to talk to you briefly about perception. when he was my team that plays in the short story step would make his name, anton chekhov kept a notebook in which he noted down his observations of the world around him, little details that other people seem to miss. every time i read chekhov and his unique vision of human life, i 'm reminded of why i too became a light. in my books, i explore nature of perception and how different kinds of perceiving create different kinds of knowing and understanding. here are three questions drawn from my work. i love it and try to figure them out, and going to ask you to consider for a moment the intuitions and the gut instincts they 're going through your head and your heart as you look at them. for example the calculation. can you feel well and the number line the solution is likely to fall? well look at the four and work and the sounds. can you get a sense of the range of meanings but it 's pointing you towards? and in terms of the line of poetry, why does the poet use the word hare laugh and in love it? i 'm asking you to do this because i believe that our personal perceptions, you see, like the heart of how we acquire knowledge. aesthetic judgments, rather than abstract reasoning, guide and shape the process by which we all come to know what we know. i 'm an extreme example of this. my worlds of words and numbers lair with color, emotion and personality. as kwan said, it 's a condition that scientists call soonest easier, when usual course talk between the fences. here are the numbers one to twelve as i see them, every number with its own shape and character. one is a flash of light light. six is a tiny and very sad black hole. the sketches i 'm black and white it, but in my mind they have come to this. three is going. four is blue. five is yellow. i paint as well. and here is one of my paintings. it 's a multiplication of two prime numbers. three-dimensional shapes and the space they create in the middle creates a new shape, the answer to the sum. what about bigger numbers. well you cannot get much bigger than empowering, the mathematical constant. it 's an infinite number, literally goes on forever. in this painting but i made of the first twenty decimals of pi, i take the covers and the emotions and the textures and i paula more together into a kind of rolling numerical landscape. but it 's not only numbers that i see in countries. words too, for me, have colors and emotions and textures. and this is an opening phrase from the novel lolita. and nabokov was himself soon is static. and you can see here how my perception of the sound l helps the alliteration to jump right out. another example, a little bit more mathematical. when i wonder if some of you will notice the construction of the sentence from the great gatsby. there is a procession of syllables, wheat, one. prairies, two. lost swede towns, three, one, two, three. and this effect is very pleasant on the mind, and it helps the sentence to feel like it. let 's go back to the questions i posed your moments ago. sixty four multiplied by seventy five. it so if you played chess, your know that sixty four is a square number, and that 's why just forwards, eight by eight, have sixty four squares. so that gives us a form that we can picture, we can perceive. about seventy five. well it 's a hundred, we think of a hundred as of being a like a square, seventy five would look like this. so what we need to do now is put those two pictures together in our mind, something like this. sixty four become sixty four hundred. and in the light hand corner, you do n't have to calculate anything. full across, four up and down, at sixteen. so what the sum is actually asking you to do is sixteen, sixteen, sixteen. that 's a lot easier than the way that the school taught you to do math, some show. it 's sixteen, sixteen, sixteen, forty eight, forty eight hundred, four thousand eight hundred, the answer to the sum. easy when you know how. the second question was an icelandic word. i 'm assuming are not many people here who speak icelandic. so let me now over choices down to two. is it a happy word was sad word? what you say? market. some people say it 's happy. most people, a majority of people say sad. and it actually means out. why do, statistically, a majority of people say that a word is sad, in this case, heavy in other cases? in my theory language evolves in such a way that sounds match, correspond with the subjective, with the personal intuitive experience of the listener. let 's have a look at the the third question. it 's a line from a poem by john keeps. words, like numbers, express fundamental relationships between objects and events and forces that constitute our world. it stands to reason that we, existing in this well it, should be in the course of our lives absorb intuitively those relationships. some poets, like other artists, play with those intuitive understandings. in the case of hare, it 's an ambiguous sound in english. you can also mean the five a quote from ahead. and if we think of that, we put the picture up, the five was represent vulnerability. there you would to the slightest movement or motion or emotion. so what you have is an atmosphere of vulnerability intention. the hare itself the animal, not a cat, litter dog, hair, why hair? because think of the picture, not a word, the picture. the overlong ears, the over large feet, helps us to picture, to feel intuitively, what it means to limp and to tremble. so in these few minutes, i hope i've been able to share a little bit of my vision of things, and to show you that words can have colors and emotions, numbers, shapes and personalities. the world is richer, vaster than it too often seems to be. i hope that i've given you desire to learn to see the world with new eyes. thank you. i 'm going to play artist with a bit of an unexpected background. i was in my twenties before i ever which an art museum. i grew up in the middle of nowhere on a dirt road in rural arkansas, an hour from the nearest movie theater. and i think it was a great place to grow up as an artist, because i grew up around quirky, colorful characters who are great at making with their hands. and my childhood is more hick than i could ever possibly relate to you, and also a more intellectual than you would ever expect. for instance, me and my sister, we were little, we would compete to see who could eat the most squirrel brains. but it on the other side of that though, we are we are big readers in our house. and if the tv was on we 're watching a documentary. and my dad is the most voracious reader i know. you can read a novel or two a day. but when i was little, i remember, he would kill flies in our house with my bb gun. and what was so amazing to me about that, what he would be in his recliner, would holler for me to fetch that bb gun, and i'd go get it. and what was amazing to me, was a bullet was pretty kickass, he was killing a fly in the house with a gun, but what was so amazing to me was that he knew just enough how pump. and he could shoot it for you know like two rooms away and not damage what was on, because he knew how to pump it just enough to kill the fly and not damage what it was landed on. so i should talk about or. but that will be here all day with my childhood stories. i love contemporary art, but i 'm also doing really frustrated with the contemporary art world and the contemporary art scene. a few years ago, i spent months in europe to see the major international art exhibitions that no have the pulse of what is supposed to be going on in the art world. and i was struck by going to so many, one after the other, kind of with some clarity of what it was that i was longing for. i mean i 'm going for several things i was n't getting, or not getting enough love. but to the main things, one of that, i was longing for more work that was appealing to a broad public, that was accessible. and the second thing that i was going for was more exquisite craftsmanship and technique. so i i started thinking and listing what all it was that i thought would make a perfect biennial. so i decided, i 'm going to start my own biennial. i 'm going to organize and direct it and get it going in the world. so i thought, okay, i have to have some criteria of how to choose work. so amongst all the country had, this kind of two main things. one of them, i call my mama 's test. and what that is is i imagine explaining a work of art to my grandmother in five minutes. and if i can explain it five minutes, then it 's it 's too obtuse or are as a trick and it has been refined enough yet. it needs to be worked on intelligence speak fluently. and then my other second set of rules, i hate to say rules because it 's are caught, my criteria would be the three ages, which is a head, heart and hands. and great art would have hit, it would have interesting intellectual ideas and concepts. it would have heart in that it would have passionate heart and soul. and it would have hand in that it would be greatly crafted. so i started thinking about poker hand this biennial, how i 'm going to show how my going to travel the world and find these artists. and then i realized one day, that there 's an easier solution to this. i 'm just going to make the whole thing myself. and so this is what i did. i i i thought, okay biennial needs artists. number did in international biennial, i need artists from all around the world. so what i did was i invented a hundred artists from around the world. i figured out their bios, their passions in life and their art styles, and i started making their work. and so i thought well, this is kind of project that i did my whole life doing. so i decided, i 'm going to make this a real biennial. it 's only two years of studio work. and i 'm going to create this in two years. in i have. so i i should i should start to talk about these guys. well the range is it 's quite a bit. and i 'm such a technician, so i love this project, getting to play with all the techniques. so for example, in realist paintings, ranges from like this, which is kind of old masters style, to really realistic still-life, to this type of painting where i 'm painting with a single hair. and then at the other end, there 's performance and short sounds and endorsed installations like this indoor installations and this one, and other installations like this one and this one. a nice image, i 'm making all these things. this is is n't publish opt. i 'm like under the river with those fish. so now let me introduce some of my fictional artists do you. this is now reynolds. now i was interested in agricultural processes, and her work is based in these practices. this piece, which is called flipped earth, she was interested in taking the sky and using it to cleanse barren ground. and by taking giant mirrors, in here she 's taking giant mirrors and then pulling them into the dirt. and the great this is twenty two feet long. what i loved about her work is, when i walk around it in and look and look down into the sky, you know looking down to watch the sky, and it folded in a new way. and probably the best part of this piece is at dusk and dawn when mike that the twilight which is falling on the ground stark, but this the light above bright above. and so you 're standing there anything else to start, that there 's this portal that you want to jump in. and this piece was great. this is in my parents backyard in arkansas. and i love to dig a hole. so this piece was great fine, has it was two days of digging and softer. the next artist is scale over three, and she 's interested enough to morality and transience. and in her most recent project, it 's called weather i made. and she 's making weather on her body 's scale. and this piece is prof. in what she did was human and on a cold, dry night in breed back and forth on the long island to leave, to leave her life 's mark, the marker of progress. and so this is five foot, five inches of frost that she left behind. the sun rises, and it melts away. and that that was played by my mum. so the next artist, this is a group of japanese artists, a collective of japanese artists, in their own and in tokyo. and they were interested in developing a new, alternative art space. and they needed funding for it, so they decided to come up with some interesting fundraising projects. one of these is scratch-off masterpieces. and so so what they 're doing, each of these artists on a nine by seven inch card, which they sell for ten bucks, they drew original works of art. and you buy one, and maybe you get a real peace and maybe not. well this is part of this has sparked a craze in japan, because everyone 's wanting a masterpiece. and the ones that are most sought after on winter only barely scratched off. and all these works, in some ways, talk about luck or fate or chance. those first two are tortured to make a jackpot winners years before and after their win. and in this one it 's called a drawing the short stick. i love this piece because i have a little cousin at home we introduced me, which i think it 's such a great introduction, to friend one day as, this is my cousin j. he draws sticks real the. which is one of the best coverage ever. this artist as gusts wind miller, and he 's doing a project, large project, called art for the peoples. and within this project, is doing a smaller project called artists in residence. and what he does is, he spends a week at a time with the family. any these shows up on the shows up on their porch, their doorstep, with was a toothbrush and pajamas, and he 's ready to spend a week with them. and using only what 's present, he goes in and makes a little abode studio to work out of. on an expense that week talking to the family about what they think great art is. yes all these discussions with their family. any digs through everything they have, and he finds materials to make war. and he makes a work that answers what they think great art is. for this family, he made this still-life painting. and whatever he makes somehow references nesting in and space and personal property. this next project, is this is by a walking parents they go, and he 's interested in, people believes that art is everywhere waiting, that it just needs a little bit of a push to happen. and he provides this push by harnessing natural forces, like in this series we used rain to make paintings. this project is called love nests. what he did was to get wild birds to make is are born. so he put the material in places where the birds were in the collective men, they crafted his nests form. and this one 's called love locksmiths. this one 's called mixtape love song nest. and this one 's called lovemaking nest. next is a belief later. sylvia 's interested in art training. she 's very serious swiss artist. and she was thinking about her friends and family who are working in my car sweden places in developing countries, and she was thinking, what can i make that would be of value to them, in case you know something bad happens and they have to buy their way across the border or pay off a gunman. and so she came up with creating these pocket-sized artworks that are portraits of the person that would carry them. and you would carry this around with you, and if everything with the health, and you could make payments and by your life. so this life price is for an irrigation non-profit director. so hopefully what happens is you never use it, and it 's it 's an airline they passed down. and she makes them so they could either be broken up into payments, or they could be like these which are leaves that can be payments. until they 're valuable. this is precious metals and gemstones. and this one had to get broken up. he had to break off a piece to get out of egypt recently. this is my duo, michael abernathy and bud holland. and they 're interested in creating culture, just tradition. so what they do is they move into an area and try to establish a new tradition and a small geographic area. so this is in eastern tennessee, and what they decided was that you know we need a positive tradition that goes with death. so they came up with big gigs. and it did did, i did you is where, for a milestone anniversary or birthday, you are and you get all your friends and family together and you dance on where you 're going to be buried. and we we got a lot of it is a millimeter thick is this. i talked my family into doing this, all that and what i was doing. like dress if you know, we 're going to go do some work. and so we got to the graveyard and made this, which was whole areas of, the attention that we got. so what happens is you dance on the grave. and then after you've done your dance, everyone toast you and tells you how great you are. new beans essence have a funeral they to be present for. that 's my mum and dad. this is my jason birdsong. he is interested in how we see as an animal, how we are interested in mimicry and camouflage. you know we look down a dark alley or jungle path, trying to make out a face or a preacher. we said that natural way of seeing. and he plays with this idea. and and this piece, schools on actually leave. there are butterfly specimens have a natural camouflage. so he pairs these up. here 's another. solar actually all real brick a butterfly specimens. and he pairs these out with paintings. like this is a painting of a stake in a box. so you you open the box and you think, well, there 's a there 's a snake in there. but it 's actually a painting. so he makes these interesting conversations about realism in mimicry in our drive to be fooled by great camouflage. the next artist is hazel clausen. it 's a parsons an anthropologist who took a sabbatical and decided, you know, i would learn a lot about culture if i created a culture that does n't exist from scratch. so that 's what she did. she created the swiss people mainly you you lights, and they have this distinctive yodeling song that that they use that you look for. and also they reference how do you like, everything they say is is falling because of the written by forbidden fruit. and that 's the symbol of on the road their culture. and this is from a documentary called sexual practices in populations control among the lights. this is this is a typical angora embroidery for them. this is one of the founders gert schaeffer. and actually this is my and irene. it was so funny like having a fake person who was making thanks things. i crack up at this piece, because when i see it i know that that 's like french angora and like all antique german ribbons and then like wall that i got in a nebraska mill have carried around for ten years and then antique chinese skirts. i 'm the next is a collective of artists called the soviet government. and their motto is to spread pragmatism one person at a time. and they 're really they 're really interested in how over coddled we've become. so this is one of their comments on our probably become. what they've done is they put a warning sign on every single bar on this man. this is called horse since spins. the next artist is keanu you know, a really interesting south korean artist. i mean he 's reworking that a confucian art tradition of scholar stones. next is made of cypress. and i love matters sites, but he 's he 's like off in his own world, and less is hearty so paranoid. and next is roy p, it 's really interesting kentucky artist, and his life the nicest guy. he and he even what 's traded a work of art for a block of government cheese because the person wanted it so badly. next is australian artist, in jackson, and this is from a project of hers called what an artwork does when we 're not watching. next is by a lithuanian fortune teller, you 're given trust. next is ginger cheshire. this is from a short film of her called the last person. and that 's my cousin and my sister 's dog, every. the next this is by a sam sandy. he 's in an australian aboriginal elder, and he 's also an artist. and this is from a large traveling sculpture projects that he 's doing. this is from a still will be. she 's a she heals with color. and she 's one of the most prolific of all these hundred artists, even though can be ninety next year. this is by a see-through, and he 's interested in statements. next is by hilda thing, and she 's a she 's doing a project called social outfits. next is by vera sokolova. and i have to say, by their kind of scares me. you cannot look at directly in the eyes, because she is kind of scary. and it 's good that she 's not real. she'd be mad that i said that. and she 's an optometrist in teepees petersburg, he plays with optics. next, this is by thomas lifted. this is from a short film, adventures with spinning. i and this is by cecile been, and it 's from a series of short films. and after this one, they 're seventy seven other artists. and all together with those other seventy seven you 're not seeing, that 's my biennial. the. my name is joshua walters. i 'm a performer. in the end but the beginning to the end of the world and the and the end of the day i was only performer, i 'm also diagnosed bipolar. reframe that as a positive, because the crazier i get onstage, the more entertaining i become. when i was sixteen in san francisco, have my breakthrough manic episode in which i thought i was jesus christ. maybe you thought that was a no scary, but actually there 's no matter drugs you can take the can get you as high as if you think you 're jesus christ. i was sent to a place, psych ward and in the psych ward, everyone is doing their own one-man show. there 's an audience like this to justify their rehearsal time. the just practising. one day they 'll get here. now when i got out, i was diagnosed and i was given medications by a psychiatrist. moving in kenya as well we give you some, work well we give you some merger this summer zyprexa. thank you. at least that 's what it says in my pen. some of you are in the field i can see. i can feel your noise. the first half of high school was the struggle of the manic episode, in the second half was the over medications of these drugs, when i was sleeping through high school. the second half was just one big nap, pretty much, in class. when i got out i had a choice. i could either deny my mental illness or embrace my mental stillness. there 's a movement going on right now to reframe mental illness as a positive, at least the hype manic edge part of it. now if you do n't know what hype mania is, it 's like an engine that 's out of control, maybe a ferrari engine with no breaks. many of the speakers here, many of you in the audience, have that creative edge, if you know what i 'm talking about. you driven to do something that everyone has told you is impossible. is a book, john gardner. john gartner wrote this book called the hype manic edge in which christopher columbus and ted turner and steve jobs and all these business minds have this edge to compete. a different book was written not too long ago in the mid nineties called a called touch with fire by kay redfield jamison, in which it was that that in a creative sense, in which motes art and they told that and then go all had this manic depression that they were suffering with. some them committed suicide. so it was n't all the good side of the illness. now recently there 's been development in this field. and there was a article written in the new york times, september two thousand ten, the stated, it just manic enough. just be manic enough in which investors we 're looking for entrepreneurs or worse they had this kind of spectrum, you know what i 'm talking about not maybe full bipolar, but they 're in the bipolar spectrum, when one side, maybe you think you 're jesus, and on the other side maybe they just make you a lot of money. your call. your car. everyone 's somewhere in the middle. everyone 's somewhere in the middle. so maybe, you know, there 's no such thing as crazy, and being diagnosed with a mental illness does n't mean you 're crazy. maybe it just means you 're more sensitive to what most people cannot see or feel. maybe no one 's really crazy. everyone is just a little bit mad. how much depends on where you fall in the spectrum. how much depends on how lucky you are. thank you. it 's amazing thing that we 're here to talk about the year of patients rising. you heard stories earlier today about patients who are taking control of their cases, patients who are saying, you know what, i know what the odds are, but i 'm going to go look for more information. i 'm going to define what the terms of my success are. i 'm gonna be sharing with you how four years ago i almost died, found out i was, in fact, already almost dead. and what i been found out about what 's called the e patient movement, i 'll explain what that term means. i have been blogging under the name patient dave, and when i discovered this, i just renamed myself he patient days. regarding the word patient, when i first started a few years ago getting involved in health care and attending meetings as just a casual observer, i noticed that people would talk about patients as if it was somebody who 's not in the room here, somebody out there. some of our talks today, we still act like that. but i 'm here to tell you, patient is not a third-person word. you, yourself, will find yourself in a hospital bed, or your mother, your child, their heads nodding, people who say, yes, i know exactly what you mean. so when you win you hear what i 'm going to talk about here today, first of all, i want to say that i 'm here on behalf of all the patients that i've ever met, all the ones i have n't met. this is about letting patients play a more active role in helping health care, in fixing health care. one of the senior doctors in my hospital, charlie saffron, and his colleague, warner slack, have been saying for decades that the most underutilized resource in all of health care is the patient. they've been saying that since the nineteen seventies. that would step back in history. this is from july, nineteen sixty nine. i was a freshman in college, and this was when we first landed on the moon. it was the first time we've ever seen from another surface, that 's the place where you and i are right now, where we live. the world was changing. there is about to change in ways that nobody could foresee. a few weeks later, woodstock happened. three days of fun and music. here, just for historical authenticity, is a picture of me in that year. i have bite the other way, the hair blue eyes, it was really something. that fall of nineteen sixty nine, the whole earth catalog came out. it was a hippie journal of self-sufficiency. we think of hippies as being just hedonists, but there 's a very strong component, i was in that movement, a very strong component of being responsible for yourself. this book 's title 's subtitle is, access to tools. and he talked about how to build your own house, how to grow your own food, all kinds of things. in the nineteen eighties, this young doctor, tom ferguson, was the medical editor of the whole earth catalog. and he saw that the great majority of what we do in medicine health care is taking care of ourselves. in fact, he said was seventy to eighty percent of our how we actually take care of our bodies. well try he also saw that when health care turns to medical care because of a more serious disease, the key thing that holds us back is access to information. and when the web came along that changed everything, because not only could we find information, we could find other people like ourselves who could gather, who could bring us information. and he coined this term the patients, equipped, engaged, empowered, enabled. obviously at this stage of life, he was in a somewhat more dignified form that he was back there. now i was an engaged patient long before i ever heard of the term. in two thousand six, i went to my doctor for regular physical, and i said i have a sore shoulder. well, i got an x-ray, and the next morning, you may have noticed, those of you who have had been through medical crisis will understand this. this morning, some of the speakers named the date when they found out about their condition. for me, it was nine am on january thirty, two thousand seven. i was at the office. my desk was clean. out of the blue partition carpet on the walls. the phone rang and it was my doctor. he said that he said, dave, i called up the x-ray image on the screen the computer at home. he said, his shoulders going to be fine, but they, there 's something in your life. if you look in that red oval, that shadow was not supposed to be there. to make a long story short, they said, so you need me to get back in there. he said, you really need to do a ct scan of your trust. the lights in parting i said, is there anything i should do. we said, i think about this one. this is the advice of doctor gives you. just go home and have a glass of wine with your wife. i went in for the cat scan, and turns out there were five of these things in both my lungs. so at that point we knew that it was cancer. we know was n't lung cancer. that meant it was met has the size from somewhere. the question was where from? so i went in for an ultrasound. i got to do what many women have, jelly on the belly in the indices. my wife came with me. she 's a veterinarian, she 's seen lots of ultrasounds. i mean, she knows another dog. but what we saw, this is an mri image. this is much sharper than an ultrasound would be. what we saw in that to me was that big blob there. and there are actually two of these. one was growing out the front of it already erupted, in latched onto the ball. one was growing out the back, and it attached to the soulless muscle, which is a big muscle in the back that i'd never heard of, it all of a sudden i cared about it. i went home. now i've been googling, i've been online since nineteen eighty nine and compuserve. i went home, and i know you cannot read the details here. that 's not important. my point is i went to a respected medical website, where in the, because i know how to filter out junk. right i also found my wife online. before i met her, i went through some suboptimal search results. so i did what i looked for quality information. there 's so much about trust, what sources of information can we trust? where does my body end and an invader start? you know cancer, tomas, something you grow out of your own tissue. how does that happen? where metal medical ability end and start? well, so what i read on whether it be, the prognosis is poor for progressing renal cell cancer. almost all patients are incurable. i've been online long enough to know if i do n't like the first results i get, to go look for more. and what i found was on other websites, even by the third page of google results, outlook is bleak, prognosis is grim. and i 'm thinking, what the heck. i did n't feel sick at all. i mean, i've been getting tired in the evening, but i was fifty six years old. i was slowly losing weight, but for me, that was what the doctor told me that. it was it was really something. this is the diagram of stage four kidney cancer from the drug they eventually got. i totally by coincidence, there 's that thing in my life. in the left femur, the left thigh bone, there 's another one. i have one. my leg eventually snapped. i think that landed on it, and it broke. there 's one in the skull, and then just for good measure, i had these other tumors, including, by the time i treatment started, one was growing out of my tongue. the kidney cancer growing out of my tongue. and what i read was that my median survival was twenty four weeks. this is bad. i was facing the grain. i thought, that 's my mother 's face can look like on the day of my funeral. i have to sit down with my daughter and say, not be here 's the situation. her boyfriend was weather. i said, i do n't want you guys to get married prematurely just so you can do it while dad 's still alive. so really serious. this if you wonder why patients are motivated and want to help, to think about this. well, my doctor prescribed the patient community, a cordon or, a network of cancer patients, of all amazing things. very quickly they told me, kidney cancer is an uncommon disease. get yourself to a specialist centre. there is no cure, but there 's something that sometimes works, it usually does n't, called high dosage into look good. most hospitals do n't offer it, so they wo n't even tell you it exists. and do n't let them give you anything else first. by the way, here are four doctors in your part of the united states who offer it and their phone numbers. how amazing is that. here 's the thing. here we are, four years later, you can find a website that gives patients that information. government-approved, american cancer society, but patients know what patients want to now. it 's the power of patient networks. this amazing substance, again i i mentioned, where does my body end? my oncologist and i talk a lot these days, because they try to keep my talks technically accurate. he said, you know, the immune system is good at detecting invaders, now that bacteria coming from outside, but when it 's your own tissue that you've grown, it 's a whole different effect. and i went through a mental exercise actually, there 's i started a patient a support community of my own on a website, and one of my friends, were my relatives actually, said, look, dave, who through this thing? how are you going to set yourself up as mentally attacking yourself? so we we went into it. the story of how all that happens is in the book. anyway, this is the way the numbers unfolded. the being me, i put the numbers from my hospital 's website from my tumor sizes into a spreadsheet. i do n't worry about the numbers. see, that 's the immune system. amazing thing, goes to yellow lines are where i got the two doses of into and two months apart. and look at how the tumor sizes plummeted in between. just incredible. who knows what we 'll be able to do when we learn to make more use of. and the punch line is that a year and a half later, i was there when this magnificent young woman, my daughter, got married. even when she came down those steps, and it was just her and me for that moment, i was so glad that you did n't have to say to her mother, i wish that i could have been here. and this is what we 're doing when we make health care better. now i want to talk briefly about a couple of other patients who are doing everything in their power to improve health care. this is regina holliday, a painter in washington dc, whose husband died of kidney cancer year after my disease. she 's painting here a mural of his horrible final weeks in the hospital. one of the things that she discovered was that her husband 's medical record in this paper folder was just disorganized. and she thought, you know, if i have a nutrition facts label on the side of a cereal box, why cannot there be something that simple telling every new nurse who comes on duty, every new doctor, the basics about my husband 's condition? so she painted this medical facts mural of with the nutrition label, the something like that, and the diagram of him. she that, last year, painted this diagram. she studied health care like me. she came to realize that there were a lot of people who'd written patient advocate books that you just do n't hear about it medical conferences. patients are such an underutilized resource. well as it said my introduction, i've gotten somewhat known for saying that patients should have access to their data. and i actually said at one conference a couple years ago, give me my damn data, because you people can be trusted to keep it clean. and here she has our damned data, it 's upon, which is starting to break out, starting to break through, the water symbolizes our data. and in fact, i want to do a little something improvisational for you here. there 's a guy on twitter that i know, my health it guy outside boston, and he wrote that he patient rap. and it goes like this. the way my damn data. i want to be in the patient just like they. do me my damn data. because it 's not to say that i could n't go any further. well thank you. that 's up the timing. i think about the possibility, why is it that i phones and i had to advance far faster than the health tools that are available to you to help take carrier family? here 's a website, visible body that come, that i stumbled across. my thought, you know, i wonder what my so it 's muscle is? so you can click on things and remove it. and i saw, a heart, that 's the kidney in the source muscle. i was rotating it in three d and saying, i understand now. and then i realized it reminded me of google earth, where you can fly to any dress. and i thought, why not take this and connected to my digital scan data and have google earth from my body? what did will come out with this year? now there 's google body browser. but we see, that it 's still generic. it 's not my data. but if we can get that they'd have out from behind the dam so software innovators can pounce on it, the way software innovators like to do, who knows what we 'll be able to come up with. one final story, this is kelly young, a rheumatoid arthritis patient from florida. this is a live story unfolding just in the last few weeks. our eight patients, as they call themselves, heard her bloggers are a warrior, have a big problem because forty percent of them have no visible symptoms. and that makes it is really hard to tell how the disease is going. in some doctors think, yeah right, you really in pain. well she found, through her online research, in nuclear bone scan that 's usually used for cancer, but it can also reveal inflammation. and she saw that if it 's a if there is no inflammation and understand a uniform gray. so he took it. and the radiologist report said, no cancer found. let 's not ready response to do with it. so she had it read again, she wanted to have it read again, and her doctor fired her. she pulled up the cd. he said, i if you do n't want to follow mice instructions, go away. so she pulled up the cd and of the scan images, and look at all those hot spots. end of it is now actively engaged other blogging looking for assistance in getting better care. see, that is an empowered patient, no medical training. we are, you are, the most underused resource in health care. what she was able to do was because she had access to the raw data. how big a deal was this? well it tends to thousand nine, tim berners-lee himself, inventor of the web, gave a talk where he said the next big thing is not to have your browser go out and find other people 's articles about the data, but the raw data. and he got them chanting by the end of the talk, raw data now. raw data now. and i ask you, to three words, please, to improve health care, let patients help. ca. right. patients help. i. let patients help. let patients help. thank you. by birth and by choice, i've been involved with the auto industry my entire life, and for the past thirty years, i've worked at ford motor company. it for most of those years, i worried about, coming in to sell more cars and trucks? but today i worry about, what if all we do is sell more cars and trucks? what happens when the number of vehicles on the road doubles, triples, or even quadruples. my life is guided by two great passions, and the first is automobiles. i literally grew up with the ford motor company. i thought i was so cool as a little boy when my dad would bring home the latest ford a lincolns and leave it in the driveway. and it i decided about that time, about age ten, that would be really cool if i was a test driver. so i counted go to dinner. they'd sit down, i'd sneak out of the house. i jump behind the wheel and take the new model around the driveway, and was a blast. the net went on for about two years, until, i think there 's about twelve, my dad brought home a a lincoln mark three. and it was snowing that day. so in went to dinner. and i stuck out and not be really cool to do doughnuts and maybe even some figure eights in the snow. my dad finished in early that evening. and he was walking to the front hall and out the front door just about the same time i hit some ice and met him at the front door with the car, and almost ended up in the front hall. so can i called my test-driving for a little while. the height really began to love cars then. and my first car was a nineteen seventy five electric green mustang. and even though the color was pretty hideous, i did love the car, and really cemented my love affair with cars it 's continued on this day. but cars are really more than a passion of mine. they 're quite literally in my blood. my great grandfather was henry ford, and on my mother 's side, of my great grandfather was harvey firestone. so when i was born, i guess you could say expectations were kind of high for me. but my great grandfather, henry ford, really believe that the mission of the ford motor company was to make people 's lives better and make cars affordable so that everyone could happen. because he believed that, with mobility, comes freedom and progress. and that 's a belief that i share. well the great passion is the environment. and as young boy, i used to go up to northern michigan and fish in the rivers that hemingway fished in and then later wrote about. and it really struck me in as the years went by, in a in a very negative way, when i would go to some stream that i'd loved, and was used to walk into this field that was once filled with fireflies, and now head strip mall or about condos on it. and so even at a young age, that really resonated with me. and and the whole notion of environmental preservation, at a very basic level, sunk in with me. as a high school, i started to read authors like throw elderly appalled and edward abbey. a and i really began to develop a deeper appreciation of the natural world. but it never really occurred to me that my love of cars and in trucks would ever be in conflict with nature. and that was true until i got to college. and what i got to college, you can imagine my surprise when i would go to class and a number of my professors would say that ford motor company and my family was kind of everything that was wrong with a lot of our country. they thought that we were more interested, as an industry, in profits, rather than progress, and that we filled the skies with smog, and frankly, we were the enemy. i joined ford after college, after some soul-searching whether not this is really the right thing to do. but i decided that i wanted to go and see if i could affect change there. and as i look back over thirty years ago, i was a little naive to think at that age that i could, but i wanted to. i really discovered that my professors were completely wrong. in fact, when i got back to detroit, my environmental leanings one exactly embraced by those in my own company, and certainly by those in the industry. i it 's very interesting conversations, are is you can imagine. there were some are within ford who believed that all this ecological nonsense should just disappear and that i needed to stop hanging out with quote environmental wackos. i was considered a radical. i 'll never forget the day i was called in by a member of top management and told to stop associating with any known or suspected environmentalists. chris i had no intention of of doing that. and i kept speaking out about the environment. and it really was the topic that we now today call sustainability. and in time, my views went from controversy o two more less consensus today. i mean, i think most people in the industry understand that we've got to get on with it. and the good news is today we are tackling the big issues, of of cars and the environment, not only for, the really as an industry. we 're pushing fuel efficiency to new heights. there was no technology, we 're reducing, and i believe, someday we 'll eliminate, co two emissions. we 're starting to sell electric cars, which is great. we 're developing alternative powertrains that are going to make the our cars affordable in every sense of the word, economically, socially and environmentally. and actually, although we've got a long way to go and a lot of work to do, i can see the day when my two great passions, cars and the environment, actually come into harmony. but unfortunately, as were our way to solving one monstrous problem, and as i said, we 're not there yet. we've got a lot of work to do, but i can see where we will, but it even as we 're in the process of doing that, another huge problem is looming, and people are noticing. and that is the freedom of mobility that my great grandfather brought to people is now being threatened just as the environment is. the problem, put in its simplest terms, is one of mathematics. today there are approximately six point eight billion people in the world. and within our lifetime, that number 's going to grow to about nine billion. in it that population level, our planet will be dealing with the limits of growth. and with that growth comes some severe practical problems, one of which is our transportation system simply wo n't be able to deal with that. when we look at the population growth in terms of cars, it becomes even clearer. today there are about eight hundred million cars on the road worldwide. and but with more people and greater prosperity around the world, that number 's going to grow to between two and four billion cars by mid-century. and this is going to create the kind of global gridlock that the world is never seen before. let 's think about the impact that this is going to have our daily lives. today the average american spends about a week a year stuck in traffic jams. and that 's a huge waste of time and resources. but that 's nothing compared to what 's going on in the nations that are growing the fastest. today the average driver in beijing has a five hour commute. and last summer, many of you probably saw this, there was a hundred mile traffic jam that took eleven days to clear in china. in the decades to come, seventy five percent of the world 's population will live in cities, and fifty of those cities will be of ten million people or more. so you can see the size of the issue that we 're facing. when you factor in population growth, it 's clear that the mobility model that we have today simply will not work tomorrow. frankly, four billion clean cars on the road are still four billion cars. and a traffic jam with no emissions is still a traffic jam. so health, if we make no changes today, what tomorrow look like? like think you probably already have the picture. traffic jams are just a symptom of this challenge, and they 're really very, very inconvenient, but that 's kind of all they are. but the bigger issue is that global gridlock is going to stifle economic growth and our ability to deliver food and health care, particularly to people that live in city centres. and our quality of life is going to be severely compromised. so what 's going to solve this? well the answer is n't going to be more of the same. my great grandfather once said before he invented the model t, if i ask people than what they wanted, they would have answered, we want faster forces. so the answer to more cars is simply not to have more roads. what america began moving west, we can add more wagon trains, we built railroads. and to connect our country after world war two, we did n't build more two-lane highways, we built the interstate highway system. today we need that same leap and thinking for us to create a viable future. we are going to build smart cars, but we also need to build smart roads, smart parking, smart public transportation systems and more. we do n't want to waste their time sitting in traffic, sitting at all those or looking for parking spots. we need an integrated system that uses real-time data to optimize personal mobility on a massive scale without hassle or compromises for travelers. if i could have the kind of system that 's going to make the future of of personal mobility sustainable. now the good news is some of this work is already begun in different parts of the world. the city of mass star in upper darby uses driverless electric vehicles that can communicate with one another, and they go underneath the city streets. up above, you've got a series of pedestrian walkways. a new york city 's thirty four street, gridlock will soon be replaced with a connected system of vehicle specific orders. pedestrian zones in dedicated traffic lanes are going to be created, and all of this will look cut down the average rush hour commute to get across town in new york from about an hour today at rush hour to about twenty minutes. now if you look at hong kong, they have a very interesting system paul arctic was there. it 's a system that really ties together all the transportation assets into a single payment system. so parking garages, buses, trains, they all operate within the same system. now shared power services are also springing up around the world. and these efforts, i think are great. the relieving congestion, and they 're frankly starting to save some fuel. these are all really good ideas that will move us forward. but what really inspires me is what 's really possible what our cars can begin talking to each other. very soon, the same system that we use today to bring music and in entertainment and gps information into our vehicles are going to be used to create a smart vehicle network. every morning i drive about thirty miles from my home in ann arbor to my office and you 're one, michigan. and every night i go home, my commute is a total crapshoot. and i often have to leave the freeway and look for different ways for me to try and make it home. but very soon we 're going to see the days when cars are essentially talking to each other. so if the car ahead of me and i ninety four hits traffic, it will immediately alert my car and tell my car to reroute itself to get me home in the best possible way. and these systems are being tested right now, and frankly they 're going to be ready for prime time pretty soon. but the potential of a connected car network is almost live limitless. one day very soon, you 'll be able to plan a trip downtown in your car will be connected to a smart parking system. so you get your car, and as you get in your car, your car will reserve you parking spot before you arrive, no more driving around looking for one, which frankly is one of the biggest users of fuel in today 's cars and in urban areas is looking for parking spots. or think about being in new york city and tracking down an intelligent cab on your smartphone so you do n't have to wait and the cold to hail one. or being in the future ted conference and having your car talk to the calendars of everybody here and telling you all the best route to take home and when you should leave, so the goal arriving here next destination on time. this is the kind of technology that will merge millions of individual vehicles into a single system. so i think it 's clear we have the beginnings of a solution to this enormous problem. but as we found out with addressing co two issues, and also fossil fuels, there is no one silver bullet. the solution is not going to be more cars, more roads or new rail system. it can only be found, i believe, in a global network of interconnected solutions. now i know we can develop the technology that 's going to make this work, we gotta be willing to get out there and seek out the solutions, whether that means vehicle sharing or public transportation or some other way we have n't even thought of yet, our overall transportation mix an infrastructure must support all the future options. we need our best and our brightest to start entertaining this issue. companies, entrepreneurs, venture capitalists, they all need to understand this is a huge business opportunity, is well as an enormous social problem. and just as these groups embrace the green energy challenge, and i was really been amazing to me to watch how much brain power, how much money and how much serious thought is n't, it over the last three, really three years is poured into the green energy field. we need that same kind of passion and energy to attack global gridlock. we need people like all of you in this room, leading thinkers. and frankly i really need all of you to think about how you can help solve this this huge issue. and we need people from all walks of life. not just inventors, we need policymakers in government officials to also think about how they 're going to respond to this challenge. this is going to be solved by any one person or one group. it 's going to really require a national energy policy of frankly for each country, because the solutions in each country are going to be different based upon income levels, traffic jams and also how integrated the the systems already are. but we need to get going, and we need to get going today. and we must have an infrastructure that 's designed to support this flexible future. you know, we've come a long way. since the model t, most people never traveled more than twenty five miles from home and their entire lifetime. and since then, but the automobile has allowed us the freedom to choose where we live, where we work, where we play and frankly when we just go out and want to move around. we do n't want to regress we lose that freedom. we 're on our way to solving, and as i said earlier, i know that a long way to go, the one big issue that we 're all focused on that threatens it, and that 's the environmental issue, but i believe we all must turn all over africa and all over ingenuity and determination to help now solve this notion of global gridlock. because in doing so, we 're going to preserve what we've really come to take for granted, which is the freedom to move and move very effortlessly around the world. and and and frankly will enhance our quality of life if we fix this. because, if you can envision, as i do, a future of zero emissions in freedom to move around the country and around the world like we take for granted today, that 's worth of hard work today to preserve that for tomorrow. i believe we 're at our best when we 're confronted with the issues. this is a big one and it wo n't wait. so let 's get started now. thank you. the high line is an old, elevated rail line that runs for a mile and a half right through manhattan. and it was originally a freight line that ran down ten thousand. and it became known as death avenue because so many people were run over by the trains that the railroad hired a guy in first back to run in front, and he became known as the west side cowboy. but even with a cowboy, about one person in a month was killed and run over. so the elevated it. they built a thirty feet, in the air right through the middle of the city. but with the rise of interstate trucking, it was used a less and less. and by nineteen eighty the last train rode. it was a train motor frozen turkeys, they say, at thanksgiving, from the meatpacking district. and that it was abandoned. and i live in the neighborhood, and i first read about it in the new york times, in articles that it said it was going to be demolished. and i assume someone was working to preserve it or save it i volunteer, but i realized no one was doing anything. i would my first community board meeting, which i'd never been to one before, and sat next to another guy named joshua david, was a travel writer. and at the end of the meeting, we realize we 're the only two people there were so interest in the project. was people wanted to tear it down. so we exchanged business cards, and we kept calling each other and decided to start this organisation, friends of the high line. and the goal at first was just saving it from demolition, but then we also wanted to figure out what we could do with it. and what first attracted me, are interested me, with this this view from the street, which is this you know steel structure, was a rusty, this industrial relic. but when i went up on top, it was a mile and a half of wildflowers running right through the middle of manhattan you know with views of the empire state building and the statue of liberty and had some river. and that 's really where we started, the idea of coalesced around, let 's make this a park, and let 's have it be sort of inspired by this a wild skate. at the time, there was a lot of opposition. mayor giuliani wanted to tear it down. i 'm a fast forward to a lot of lawsuits and a lot of sort of community engagement. mayor bloomberg came in office, he was very supportive, but we still have to make the economic case. this was after nine allowed in. the city was in tough times. so we commissioned an economic feasibility study to try to make the case. and it turns out, we got those numbers wrong. we said it would cost a hundred million dollars to build. so far it 's cost about a hundred and fifty million. and the the main case was, this is going to make good economic sense for the city. so we said over twenty year time period, the value to the city and increased property values and increased taxes would be about two hundred fifty million. that was enough. it really got the city behind it. it turns out we were wrong on that. now people estimate it 's created about has a billion dollars, and will create about half a billion dollars, in tax revenues for the city. we did a design competition, selected the design team. we worked with them to really create a design that was inspired by that sort of wild skate. there 's three sections. we open the first section in two thousand nine. it 's been so successful beyond our dreams. last year we had about two million people, which is about ten times what we ever estimated. this is one of my favorite features in section one. it 's this amphitheater right over ten thousand. on the first section in the twentieth street right now. the other thing, it 's generated, obviously, a lot of economic value. it 's also inspired, i think, a lot of great architecture is. there 's a point, where you can stand here and see buildings by frank gehry, jean new bell, sugar bond, yields and ari. and the whitney is moving downtown and is building that their new museum right at the base of the high line. in this is being designed by renzo piano. and they 're going to break ground in may. and we've already started construction on section two. this is one of my favorite features, this flyover where year eight feet off the surface of the high line, running through a canopy of trees. the high line used to be covered in billboards, and so we've sort of taken a playful take where instead of framing advertising, and it 's because frame people and views of the city. this was just installed last month. and then the last section it was going to go around the rail yards, which is the largest undeveloped site in manhattan. and the city has planned, for better for worse, at twelve million square feet of development the line is going to ring around. but you know, what really, i think, makes the high line special is the people. and honestly, even though i love the designs that we 're building, i was always frightened that i would n't really love it, because i fell love without wild escape, and how could you re-create that magic? but what i found is it is it 's in the people and how they use it that, to me, makes it so special. just one quick example is i realize right after we opened that they 're all these people holding hands on the high line. i realized new yorkers do n't hold his that. we just do n't do that and outside fate. well you see that happening on the high line, and i think that 's you know the power that the public space can have to transform how people experience the city and interact with each other. thank you for. a few years ago, i felt like i was stuck in a rut, so i decided to follow in the footsteps of the great american philosopher, morgan spurlock, and try something new for thirty days. the idea is actually pretty simple. think about something you've always wanted to add to your life and try it for the next thirty days. it turns out, thirty days is just about the right amount of time to have new habit or subtract a habit, like watching the news, from your life. there 's a few things that i learned while doing these thirty day challenges. the first was, instead of the months flying by, forgotten, the time was much more memorable. this was part of a challenge i did to take a picture every day for a month. and i remember exactly where i was and what i was doing that day. i also noticed that as i started to do more and harder thirty day challenges, my self-confidence grew. i went from death dwelling computer nerd to the kind of guy who bikes to work, for fun. even last year, i ended up hiking up mount kilimanjaro, the highest mountain in africa. i would never have been dead adventurous before i started my thirty day challenges. i also figured out that if you really want something badly enough, you can do anything for thirty days. if you 're wanted write a novel? every november, tens of thousands of people try to write their own fifty thousand word novel from scratch in thirty days. it turns out, all you have to do is write sixteen hundred and sixty seven words a day for a month. so i did. by the way, the secret is not to go to sleep and so you've written your words for the day. you might be sleep-deprived, but you 'll finish a novel. now is my book the next great american novel? now all i wrote in a month. it 's cool. but for the rest of my life, if i meet john hodge and meditate party, i do n't have to say, i 'm a computer scientist. now, now, if i want to i can say, i 'm a novelist. so here 's one last thing i'd like to mention. i learned that when i made small, sustainable changes, things i could keep doing, they 're more likely to stick. there 's nothing wrong with big, crazy challenges. in fact, there a ton of fun. but they 're less likely to stick. when i gave up sugar for thirty days, day thirty one looked like this. so here 's my question to you, what do you waiting for? i guarantee you the next thirty days are going to pass whether you like it or not, so why not think about something you've always wanted to try and give it a shot for the next thirty days. thanks. good morning everybody. i work with really amazing that will itty-bitty creatures called cells. and let me tell you what it 's like to grow these cells in the lab. i work in the lab where we take cells out of their native environment. we played them into dishes that we sometimes call petri dishes. and we feed them, stay early of course, with what we call cell culture media, which is like their food and we grow them in incubators. why do i do this? we observe the cells in a plate, and there know just on the surface. but what we 're really trying to do in my lab is to engineer tissues out of that. what does that even mean? well it means growing in actual heart, let 's say, or grow a piece of bone that can be put into the body. not only that, but they can also be used for disease models. i 'm going to purpose, traditional cell culture techniques just really are n't enough. the cells are kind of homesick. the dish does n't feel like their home. and so we need to do better at copying their natural environment to get them to thrive. we call this the by in the medical paradigm, copying nature in the lab. let 's take the example of the heart, the topic of a lot of my research. what makes the heart unique? well, the heart beats rhythmically, tirelessly, faithfully. we copy this in the land by outfitting cell culture systems with electrodes. these electrodes act like mini pacemakers to get the cells contract in the lab. what else do we know about the heart? well heart cells are pretty greedy. nature feeds the heart cells in your body with a very, very dense blood supply. in the lab, we might for patterns channels in the by materials on which we grow the cells. and this allows us to flow the cell culture media, the cells food, through the scaffolds were growing the cells, a lot like what you might expect from a cap larry capillary bed in the heart. so this brings me to lesson number one, life can do a lot with very little. let 's take the example of electrical stimulation. let 's see how powerful just one of these essentials can be. on the left, we see a tiny piece of beating heart tissue that they engineered from rat cells in the lab. it 's about the size of a mini marshmallow. after one week, it 's beating. you can see it up in the upper left-hand corner. the door if you can see it so well. it 's amazing that these cells beat at all. but what 's really amazing is that the cells, when we electrically stimulate them like with a pacemaker, that they be so much more. that brings me to lesson number jim, cells do all the work. in a sense, tissue engineers have a bit of an identity crisis here, because, you know, a structural engineers build bridges and big things, computer engineers, computers, but what we are doing is actually building enabling technologies for the cells themselves. what is this mean for us? let 's do something really simple. let 's remind ourselves that cells are not an abstract concept. let 's remember that our cells sustain our lives in a very real way. we are what we eat, could easily be described as, we are what our cells eat. and in the case of the flora in our gut, these cells may not even be human. but it 's also worth noting that cells also mediate our experience of life. behind every sound, sight, touch, taste and smell is a corresponding set of cells that receive this information and interpret it for us. it begs the question, cell we expand our sense of environmental stewardship to include the ecosystem of our own bodies? i invite you to talk about this with me further, and in the meantime, i wish you luck. may none of your in on cancer cells become endangered species. thank you.